feat(tutorial): cilicon - self-hosted ci on apple silicon (#2547)
scaleway/docs-content: tutorials/cilicon-self-hosted-ci-on-apple-silicon/index.mdx

---
meta:

>   title: Getting started with Cilicon self hosted CI on Apple silcion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title: Getting started with Cilicon self-hosted CI on Apple silcion
```

>   description: This page explains how to setup a self-hosted CI on Apple silicon using Cilicon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description: This page explains how to set up a self-hosted CI on Apple silicon using Cilicon
```

content:

>   h1: Getting started with Cilicon self hosted CI on Apple silcion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  h1: Getting started with Cilicon self-hosted CI on Apple silcion
```

>   paragraph: This page explains how to setup a self-hosted CI on Apple silicon using Cilicon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  paragraph: This page explains how to set up a self-hosted CI on Apple silicon using Cilicon
```

categories:
  - apple-silicon
tags: bare-metal apple-silicon m1 m2pro
dates:
  validation: 2023-12-14
  posted: 2023-12-14
---

Cilicon, a macOS application developed by Trade Republic, uses Apple's Virtualization Framework to create, allocate, and execute ephemeral CI (Continuous Integration) virtual machines with near-native performance. The underlying concept of Cilicon follows a simple cycle:

1. **Duplicate Image:**
   Cilicon rapidly replicates the Virtual Machine bundle (folder) for each run, using APFS's cloning feature for swift handling, even with large bundles.

2. **Provision Shared Folder:**

>    Depending on the chosen provisioner, Cilicon populates the bundle's resources folder with files essential for the Guest OS. For example, the GitHub Actions provisioner equips the image with the runner download URL, registration token, name, and labels. The process provisioner executes a specified executable during both provisioning and de-provisioning stages. If needed, provisioners can be omitted by setting the type to "none," suitable for services like Buildkite using non-expiring registration tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Depending on the chosen provisioner, Cilicon populates the bundle's resources folder with files essential for the guest OS. For example, the GitHub Actions provisioner equips the image with the runner download URL, registration token, name, and labels. The process provisioner executes a specified executable during both provisioning and de-provisioning stages. If needed, provisioners can be omitted by setting the type to "none," suitable for services like Buildkite using non-expiring registration tokens.
```

3. **Start Virtual Machine:**
   Cilicon initiates the virtual machine and automatically mounts the resources folder of the bundle on the guest OS.

4. **Listen for Shutdown:**

>    Cilicon actively monitors shutdown signals from the Guest OS. Upon shutdown, it removes the used image, preparing for a fresh start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Cilicon actively monitors shutdown signals from the guest OS. Upon shutdown, it removes the used image, preparing for a fresh start.
```

> Cilicon utilizes the tart container format and integrates an OCI client for fetching images from the internet. The tool currently supports GitHub Actions, Buildkite Agent, GitLab Runner, and arbitrary scripts.

Author: ```suggestion
Cilicon uses the tart container format and integrates an OCI client for fetching images from the internet. The tool currently supports GitHub Actions, Buildkite Agent, GitLab Runner, and arbitrary scripts.
```

2. Download the latest release of [Cilicon](https://github.com/traderepublic/Cilicon/releases/latest).
3. Move the file `Cilicon.app` to the applications folder of your OS.
4. Add `Cilicon.app` as a [launch item](https://support.apple.com/guide/mac-help/open-items-automatically-when-you-log-in-mh15189/13.0/mac/13.0) and set up [automatic login](https://support.apple.com/en-us/102316).
   - Disable automatic software updates and any screen lock, battery-saving features, etc. to avoid issues with your Cilicon machine.
   - Cilicon expects a `cilicon.yml` configuration file in the host OS's home directory. Refer to the [official documentation](https://github.com/traderepublic/Cilicon/blob/main/Cilicon/Config/Config.swift) for available settings.

## Cilicon Configuration

Cilicon uses YAML configuration files for settings, expected to be in a `cilicon.yml` file in the host OS's home directory.

<Message type="tip">
  - When using an OCI hosted image, ensure to include the `oci://` scheme at the beginning of the URL. Without it, Cilicon will interpret the path as a local filesystem location.

>   - Refrain from using the "latest" tag; instead, explicitly mention the desired Xcode version (e.g., 14.3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Refrain from using the "latest" tag; instead, explicitly mention the desired Xcode version (e.g. 14.3).
```

  - Regularly clean the `~/.tart` folder to remove any unused images.
  - Be aware that images with more recent macOS versions may share the same Xcode version. If upgrading, remember to manually remove outdated images.
</Message>

### GitHub Actions Provisioner

To use the GitHub Actions provisioner, create and install a new GitHub App with `Self-hosted runners` `Read & Write` permissions on the organization level. Download the private key file and reference it in the configuration file.

```yaml
source: oci://ghcr.io/cirruslabs/macos-ventura-xcode:14.3.1
provisioner:
  type: github
  config:
    appId: <APP_ID>
    organization: <ORGANIZATION_SLUG>
    privateKeyPath: ~/github.pem
```

### GitLab Runner Provisioner

To use the GitLab Runner provisioner, create a runner with an authentication token.

> Following you can find a minimal example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a basic example:
```

```

Or refer to a full configuration:

```yaml
source: oci://ghcr.io/cirruslabs/macos-ventura-xcode:14.3.1
provisioner:
  type: gitlab
  config:
    gitlabURL: <GITLAB_INSTANCE_URL>
    runnerToken: <RUNNER_TOKEN>
    executor: <EXECUTOR> # defaults to 'shell'
    maxNumberOfBuilds: <MAX_BUILDS> # defaults to '1'
    downloadLatest: <DOWNLOAD_LATEST> # defaults to 'true'
    downloadURL: <DOWNLOAD_URL> # defaults to GitLab official S3 bucket
    configToml: >
      <CONFIG_TOML> # Advanced config as custom config.toml file to be appended to the basic config and copied to the runner.
```

### Buildkite Agent Provisioner

To use the Buildkite Agent provisioner, set your agent token in the provisioner config.

```yaml
source: oci://ghcr.io/cirruslabs/macos-ventura-xcode:14.3.1
provisioner:
  type: buildkite
  config:
    agentToken: <AGENT_TOKEN>
```

### Script Provisioner

If you want to run a script (e.g. to start a runner that is not natively supported), use the `script` provisioner.

```yaml
source: oci://ghcr.io/cirruslabs/macos-ventura-xcode:14.3.1
provisioner:
  type: script
  config:
    run: |
      echo "Hello World"
      sleep 10
```

## Conclusion

> This tutorial has provided you a basic understanding of how to set up and configure provisioners for various CI platforms, enabling the use of this powerful macOS application for Continuous Integration (CI) on Apple silicon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial gives basic guidance for setting up and configuring provisioners for various CI platforms, enabling the use of this powerful macOS application for Continuous Integration (CI) on Apple silicon.
```

> This tutorial has provivded you a basic understanding of how to set up and configure provisioners for various CI platforms, enabling the use of this powerful macOS application for Continuous Integration (CI) on Apple Silicon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial has provided you a basic understanding of how to set up and configure provisioners for various CI platforms, enabling the use of this powerful macOS application for Continuous Integration (CI) on Apple silicon.
```
